# relax.js

Relax.js is a simple node framework for building truly RESTful web applications in Javascript (or Typescript) using node.js.

Relax.js is written itself in Typescript but it is packaged as a regular node component and, as such, does not require the use of Typescript.

The spirit of this framework is to encourage a fully REST approach when developing web services.
In Relax.js you implement **resources** and add them to the Site being served by your server.
In Relax.js you cannot route URL patterns to functions - in fact - there is no routing facility.
The mapping of each URL to the appropriate resource is done automatically on the base of the structure of your resource tree.

Read on to understand how it works.

## Getting started

The core elements of a Relax.js application are the site and its resources.

In this example we build a very simple web service using relax.js returning one resource with static data.

```javascript
var r = require('relaxjs');

var site = r.site('Simple Service');

site.add( { name: 'user',
            data: { first-name: 'Michael', last-name: 'Smith', 'id' : 1245 } });

site.serve().listen(3000);
```

Save this file as simpleSrv.js and type

```
node simpleSrv.js
```

Each resource can respond to the 4 HTTP verbs:
**GET**, **POST**, **UPDATE** and **DELETE** using a specific function or just by returning data.
From the example above you can reach the user resource with this URL in your browser (GET):

```
http://localhost:3000/user
```

Applications written with Relax.js do not require specifying any routing:
each request URL univocally identifies the resource to load in the back end.

In other words: the taxonomy of your data resources automatically defines the URL patterns.

## Resources

Resources are the focal elements in any Relax.js application. Resources can represent individual objects or
contain and represent collections of other objects (i.e. child resources).

### Verbs functions

In the previous example we created a static resource. We can create a dynamic resource that respond with
different data depending on the time of the request by providing a onGet() function:

```javascript
var timeResource = {
  name: 'current-time'
  onGet : function() {
    return {
      current-time : ''+date.getHours()+':'+date.getMinutes()+'.'+date.getSeconds()+' UTC'
    }
  }
};
site.add( timeResource );
```

With `http://localhost:3000/current-time` I will get a JSON back with the time at the server.

A resource can implement the following HTTP verb response functions:

- onGet()
- onPost()
- onUpdate()
- onDelete()

> Need to add example for each verb.


## Resource Representation

Relax.js default response format is **JSON**. Native Javascript data returned by a resource is automatically converted to JSON.
However Realx.js provide two other standard formats: XML and HTML.

### HTML Views

A Resource can be represented through a HTML page. Relax.js uses [underscore templating engine](http://underscorejs.org/#template) to bind
resource data with a HTML template.
HTML templates are located under a views directory and use the **'._'** extension. To associate a view
to a given resource you just need to specify the view name in the resource view property:

```javascript
site.add( { name: 'user',
            view: 'user'
            data: { first-name: 'Michael', last-name: 'Smith', 'id' : 1245 } });
```

the file **view/user._** can be like this:

```html
<html>
<head>
  <title>User Id <%= id %></title>
</head>
<body>
  <%= first-name %> <%= last-name %>
</body>
</html>
```

You can also embed a view within anoter file to share a common layout.

> More info on this soon ...

### XML

> [More info here soon...]


## Resource Collections

Relax.js implement a simple convention to convert a path in the request URL into a query to a specific resource.
The root resource of any Relax.js application is the site. The site has its own default HTML representation.

```
http://localhost:3000/
```

This HTML page is automatically generated by the framework using the framework itself.

> The following is not implemented yet

You can disable this page and redirect to a home resource automatically by setting the home resource for the site:

```javascript
site.setHome('/users');
```

### Accessing child resources by index

When you add resources to the Site the list of all the resources added is shown in the default site page.
The Site is a Container for other resources. Every resource can itself contain resources. For example:

```
var users = {
  view: 'users',
  resources: [
    { name: 'user', data: {  first-name: 'John', last-name: 'Smith', 'id' : 1001 } },
    { name: 'user', data: {  first-name: 'Joe', last-name: 'Doe', 'id' : 1002 } },
    { name: 'user', data: {  first-name: 'Mary', last-name: 'Lane', 'id' : 1003 } },
  ]
}
```

I can access the second user using this URL:

```
http://localhost:3000/users/user/2
```

> The index value can be omitted if there is only one resource with a given name.
> For example the previous URL could have been written as `http://localhost:3000/users/0/user/2`

### Access by unique names

As alternative you can give each resource a unique name with-in the collection.

```
var users = {
  view: 'users',
  resources: [
    { name: 'john-smith', data: {  first-name: 'John', last-name: 'Smith', 'id' : 1001 } },
    { name: 'joe-doe', data: {  first-name: 'Joe', last-name: 'Doe', 'id' : 1002 } },
    { name: 'mary-lane', data: {  first-name: 'Mary', last-name: 'Lane', 'id' : 1003 } },
  ]
}
```

This way you can access these resource with a *nicer* URL:

```
http://localhost:3000/users/mary-lane
```

### Access by key

> This is not implemented yet and I am not sure is needed.

By default Relax allows to specify a key to select a specific resource within the URL just after the resource name.
We can force Relax.js to use our own key to retrieve a resource if we write the resources this way:

```
var users = {
  view: 'users',
  resources: [
    { name: 'user', key: 1001, data: {  first-name: 'John', last-name: 'Smith', 'id' : 1001 } },
    { name: 'user', key: 1002, data: {  first-name: 'Joe', last-name: 'Doe', 'id' : 1002 } },
    { name: 'user', key: 1003, data: {  first-name: 'Mary', last-name: 'Lane', 'id' : 1003 } },
  ]
}
```

If the Key property is present the element next to the resource name in the URL will be
used as Key entry. This way I can access the second user using this way:

```
http://localhost:3000/users/user/1002
```

We can use different type of keys:

```
var users = {
  view: 'users',
  resources: [
    { name: 'user', key: 'john-smith', data: {  first-name: 'John', last-name: 'Smith', 'id' : 1001 } },
    { name: 'user', key: 'joe-doe', data: {  first-name: 'Joe', last-name: 'Doe', 'id' : 1002 } },
    { name: 'user', key: 'mary-lane', data: {  first-name: 'Mary', last-name: 'Lane', 'id' : 1003 } },
  ]
}
```

and use them in the URL request: `http://localhost:3000/users/user/joe-doe`


## Dynamic Collections

> Not implemented yet

In the example above the resource was created before-hand and available in memory.
In most cases, however, this is not the case. In most cases we read data from a data-store (a data base) and
we may not even know if a particular requested resource exists or not until we try to read it in
response to a given request.

The task of retrieving a resource data can be given to the onGet() function for a given resources type.
We could get the key or the parameters of the requests this way:

```javascript
var users = {
  view: 'users',
  resources: [
    { name: 'user',
      onGet( ctx, relPath, query ) {
        return dataStore.getUserFromId( query.id ) ;
      }
    },
  ]
}
```
> [More info here soon...]

## Request Parameters

> Note this is not implemented yet

All these functions can accept a variable number of parameters depending on what is specified in the
queryString or in the body of the request. For example in this request:

```
http://localhost:3000/user?output=name
```

We are requesting the user address resource. We can implement our resource to respond to this request:

```javascript
var johnSmithRes = {
  onGet: function( ctx, params ) {
    switch(params['out']) {
      case 'name':
        return {
          'id' : 1245,
          first-name: 'Michael',
          last-name: 'Smith'
        }
      break;
      case 'all':
      default:
        return {
          'id' : 1245,
          first-name: 'Michael',
          last-name: 'Smith',
          street: '1234 5th Avenue',
          city: 'New York',
          state: 'NY',
          country: 'USA'
        }
      break;
    }
  }
};
site.add( 'user', johnSmithRes });
```
